---
breadcrumb: <div id="breadcrumb"><a href="index.html">Home</a> <span class="breadcrumb_spacer">&gt;</span>
  <a href="departments.html">Departments and Courses</a> <span class="breadcrumb_spacer">&gt;</span>
  <strong>Department of Geology</strong></div>
headerimage: <img alt="" height="105" src="assets/2006/images/banners/departments.jpg" width="472"/>
html_title: Department of Geology | Department Profile
layout: 2006_default
left_title:
- <img alt="Dpt. of" border="0" height="33" src="assets/2006/content/gt/fcb6421c7c62628408190d4ca84029e5.png"
  title="Dpt. of" width="98"/>
- <img alt="Geology" border="0" height="33" src="assets/2006/content/gt/fde9df1416648edbb1d1509cd3471e82.png"
  title="Geology" width="122"/>
old_website: true
permalink: /geology_dep.html
published: true
subnav:
- <li class="sub_no sub_first"><a href="geology_dep.html" title="About">About</a></li>
- <li class="sub_no"><a href="129.0.0.1.0.0.html" title="Faculty">Faculty</a></li>
- <li class="sub_no"><a href="130.0.0.1.0.0.html" title="Courses">Courses</a></li>
- <li class="sub_no"><a href="131.0.0.1.0.0.html" title="Students">Students</a></li>
title: Department Profile
---

# Department Profile

  

**DEPT. OF PG STUDIES & RESEARCH IN GEOLOGY**

The Department of Geology was established in 1962-63 with the admission of
students to the first year B.Sc. Degree Course in Geology. This was the only
college in the entire Malabar area in those days that offered an under-
graduate course in Geology. The growth and development of the Department had
played a pivotal role in shaping the future of hundreds of geologists of
Kasaragod and adjoining districts. The Post-graduate course in M.Sc. Geology
was started in 1979 and the Department has already started the Golden Jubilee
Celebrations on January 6th 2013, which was inaugurated by Sri. N.A.
Nellikunnu, honourable M.L.A of Kasaragod. This is the only college which
offers B.Sc. and M.Sc. courses in Geology under Kannur University. It was
elevated to a Research Centre in 2005 and since then the Department has been
redesignated as Department of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Geology.

Prof. K.P. Ramachandran Nair was the first Head of the Department, Prof. T.C.
Madhava Panicker, Prof. R. Mahadeva Iyer, Prof. S. Mohanakumar, Prof. M. Rama
Sarma, Prof. Harimohan Bhattathiri, Prof. P. Krishnan Nair, Prof. G.
Gopalakrishnan, Prof. Sri Ram, Prof. V. Gopinathan and Prof. T.P. Surendran
Nair were the former HODs and Dr. P.V. Vijayan, Dr. P. Mohammed Rafeekh, Prof.
M. Muralidhara, Prof. K.K. Beenukumar, Prof. S.S. Anil Kumar, K. Vishwabharan,
Dr. Thamban Meloth, Sri. Ashok Kumar were some of the earlier faculty members
of the department. Among these Prof. T.C. Madhava Panicker and Prof. V.
Gopinathan have retired as Deputy Director of Collegiate Education. A rare
coincidence in the history of the Department is that three BSc and MSc Geology
classmates viz. Prof.Sriram, Prof.V.Gopinathan and Dr. P.V.Vijayan were at the
helm of affairs of Govt.College as Principal in succession during 2007 , 2008
and 2009 respectively. Several students of this department have served in
various organizations/institutions/departments in India and abroad. Many are
working as Class 1 officers in the Geological Survey of India (GSI), Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO),
Centre for Earth Science Studies (CESS), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB),
National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), National Centre for Antarctic and
Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa, Centre for Water Resources Development and
Management (CWRDM), Kozhikode, Kerala State Council for Science, Technology
and Environment (KCSTE), National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Remote Sensing
Utilization Centers, Land Management Departments, Logging Engineers and
Geophysicists, Kerala State Ground Water Department, State Department of
Mining and Geology and in various Universities and Colleges as faculty
members. Majority of the present faculty members are the old students of this
department.

Dr. M. Vijayanunni Nambiar, one of the oldest alumnus (1962-1965 batch), was
selected to the Indian Administrative Service (IAS), later served as District
Collector of the then Cannanore district comprising the present Kasaragod
district and also served as Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India,
Additional Chief Secretary and Chief Secretary of Govt. of Kerala. Our rich
alumni include Sri. P. Balakrishnan, Sri. A. Raghavan Nambiar, Sri. V. K. K.
Kalluraya, Sri. Sreepada Rao, and Sri. K. S. Adiga former Directors of
Geological Survey of India; Sri. K.T. Vidyadharan and Sri. P. V. Sukumaran
were former Deputy Director General of the Geological Survey of India.

Some of the alumni are presently on prestigious positions in the Central
Government, PSU's and Autonomous Institutions such as Geological Survey of
India (Sri. E. Unnikrishnan, Sri. K. Ramachandran, Sri. Abdulla, Sri. K.
Gangadharan, etc.), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (Sri. N. Ashok Kumar, Sri.
Srinavasa Bhat Padoor, Sri. K. Muralidharan, Sri. Vishwanathan Nambiar, Sri.
Uthaman, Sri. K. Gopakumar, etc.), Central Ground Water Board (Sri. M. Najeeb,
Sri. K. Kunhambu, Sri. K. Sooryanarayanan, etc.), Indian Space Research
Organization (Dr. K. Ganesh Raj), National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean
Research (Dr. Thamban Meloth), Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services (Dr. Balakrishnan), National Institute of Hydrology (Dr. K.
Purandara), Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment (Dr.
K.K. Ramachandran, Dr. K. Kamalaksha, Dr. K. Harinarayana, etc.)

The department has been rendering great service to the people of this region
for the last five decades. The field investigations undertaken by the M.Sc.
students in connection with their dissertation/ project work helped to collect
factual data on the hydrogeological conditions of the region and the
environmental degradation as a result of unscientific developmental
activities. The need for sustainable development is given due importance in
under-graduate as well as and post-graduate curriculum. The department has
been actively involved in extension work in connection with the Peoples
Planning Programme during the X plan at Panchayath levels. Various awareness
programmes are also undertaken from time to time. Short Term Courses,
Exhibitions, Refresher Courses for High School and College teachers, National
Seminars, etc. were conducted to make the people aware about the need to
protect the environment, to stop soil erosion and prevent landslides. As part
of its extension activities, the Department is always positive in extending
its service by conducting Exhibitions open to university students, Higher
Secondary School teachers and School students and donating collection of
minerals, rocks and fossils to institutions not only to develop their
laboratory but also to make teaching in schools more efficient and student
friendly. Queries from the general public and teachers of universities and
schools are answered properly regarding rocks and minerals of peculiar type
encountered in their area and useful advices and recommendations regarding
soil, land and water etc are done free of cost by the Department.

The study tours conducted to different parts of the country have helped
considerably in developing the Geology museum with rare collections of rocks,
minerals and fossils. The department has undertaken Research Projects funded
by STED and DST. Presently there is one UGC Minor Research Project entitled
'Solid Waste Management in Kasaragod Municipality and Surrounding Panchayaths'
with a fund allocation of 1.90 lakhs. Former Department faculty Dr. M.A.
Mohammed Aslam has been nominated as Syndicate Member of Kannur University
since Dec 2012. Some of the teachers have presented papers in National and
International Seminars.

The Department of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Geology is one of the
prestigious departments of Govt. College Kasaragod. A great number of alumni
visit the department regularly and help as Resource Persons whenever Seminars/
Lectures/ Workshops are arranged in the department. The Department has been
imparting quality education to the new generation to pave way for budding
geologists of future generation by a team of dedicated teachers by ensuring a
student friendly and calm academic atmosphere in the Department. The results
of UGC-CSIR JRF/NET Examination, UPSC Geologists Examinations, and University
Examinations within and outside the state during the last several decades have
made indelible impression in the society that the students who passed out from
this institution are behind none; for a good percentage of them have secured
enviable ranks and good placement. In this context, the faculty of the
Department is determined to rededicate ourselves by re-affirming our sincerity
and faith in imparting quality education for the society in general and the
Department in particular.

**Courses in Geology, Eligibility & students intake**

The following courses are offered by the department.

1. **B.Sc. Geology** (6 semesters)

Programme under Course Credit Semester System (CCSS) of six semesters with
Core Courses in Geology; Common Courses in English and Additional language;
Complementary Courses in Chemistry and Physics and two Open Courses.

**Eligibility** : A pass in Higher Secondary/Plus two/ CBSE/ VHSE Examination
in Science combination or any other combination with Geology as one of the
subject.

**Student intake** : The present sanctioned strength is 18 and proposal has
been given to increase the strength to 24.

2. **M.Sc. Geology** (Four semesters)

The course structure consists of twelve theory papers, four practical papers,
Combined Field Mapping Programme, Dissertation project work and Viva-Voce.

**Eligibility** : B.Sc. Geology with Physics/ Chemistry/ Statistics/
Mathematics/ Remote Sensing as Complementary Courses.

**Student intake** : The present sanctioned strength is 10.

3. **Ph.D**. The department has been recognized as a Research Center in Geology since 2005.

**Eligibility** : M.Sc. Degree in Geology with not less than 55% marks.

**Student intake** : Depends on applications.

**Reservation of Seats** : As per G.O (MS) 104/07H Edn. Dept. Dated:
24-07-2007 and letter No. G2/25654/06/Coll. Edn., Dated: 21-01-2008, seats are
reserved for various categories of students as SC/ST: 20%, OBC: 20% and
Forward Caste BPL: 10%.

![](assets/2006/img/article/top_link_0.gif)